your heart is a pump it's a muscular
organ about the size of your fist and is
located slightly left of center in your
chest your heart is divided into the
right and left side the division
protects oxygen-rich blood from mixing
with oxygen-poor blood together your
heart and blood vessels comprise your
cardiovascular system which circulates
blood and oxygen around your body in
fact your heart pumps about five quarts
of blood every minute and it beats about
100,000 times in one day that's about 35
million times in a year
oxygen poor blood Blue Blood returns to
the heart after circulating through your
body the right side of the heart
composed of the right atrium and
ventricle collects and pumps the blood
to the lungs through the pulmonary
arteries the lungs refresh the blood
with a new supply of oxygen making it
turn red oxygen-rich blood red blood
then enters the left side of the heart
composed of the left atrium and
ventricle and is pumped through the
aorta to the body to supply tissues with
oxygen for valves within your heart keep
your blood moving the right way the
tricuspid mitral pulmonary and aortic
valves work like gates on a fence they
open only one way and only when pushed
on each valve opens and closes once per
heartbeat or about once every second
a beating heart contracts and relaxes
contraction is called systole and
relaxing is called diastole during
systole your ventricles contract forcing
blood into the vessels going to your
lungs and body much like ketchup being
forced out of a squeeze bottle the right
ventricle contracts a little bit before
the left ventricle does your ventricles
then relax during diastole and are
filled with blood coming from the upper
chambers the left and right atria then
the cycle starts over again
your heart is nourished by blood to
blood vessels called coronary arteries
extend over the surface of your heart
and branch into smaller capillaries here
you can see just the network of blood
vessels that feed your heart with
oxygen-rich blood your heart also has
electrical wiring which keeps it beating
electrical impulses begin high in the
right atrium and travel through
specialized pathways to the ventricles
delivering the signal to pump the
conduction system keeps your heart
beating in a coordinated and normal
rhythm which in turn keeps blood
circulating the continuous exchange of
oxygen-rich blood with oxygen-poor blood
is what keeps you alive